js: types as comments proposal (#12)
weeklyjs/weeklyjs.github.io: docs/_posts/2022-06-24-types-as-comments-proposal.md

Adding type information syntax to the language enables the potential use of static type checkers to prevent certain classes of bugs. That is to say, static type checking would be possible without having to develop in another statically typed language (such as *TypeScript* or *Flow*) that transpiles to JavaScript. 

For JavaScript developers, this promises at least two things: 
1. a faster development loop (i.e. without a transpilation step), and
2. free choice of tooling for type checking.

## Why static type checking?

### Cannot read property 'bar' of undefined

The case for static type checking is not particularly hard.

As JavaScript developers, we probably all know the language's famously weak and dynamic type system which has no problem with letting funny code like the following pass to the interpreter without throwing errors (all examples were run with Node v14.19.3)

```bash
$ node -e 'console.log(3 + [])'
3
$ node -e 'console.log({}.foo)' 
undefined
```

> > :information_source: Have a look at [Programming TypeScript][oreilly-programming-typescript] (p. 3) for more examples.

Reviewer: You might want to deep link to p3 to make it easier to find the correct examples:

https://www.google.de/books/edition/Programming_TypeScript/Y-mUDwAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&pg=PA3&printsec=frontcover

> 

Obviously, even though the `+` operator may be overloaded to add strings and arrays, it doesn't make a lot of sense to do that in the first place. Neither does accessing a custom property `foo` on a, very obviously, empty object. The developers of JavaScript, in a very questionable attempt to make developer lives easier in the short run, opted to take care of these kinds of problems by

1. in the first case applying [type coercion](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Type_coercion), and 
2. in the second case by defaulting to the special value `undefined` that models undefined values.

If you have ever ripped your hairs trying to find the cause of the infamous "TypeError: Cannot read property 'bar' of undefined" runtime error, e.g.
```bash
$ node -e 'console.log({}.foo.bar)'
[eval]:1
console.log({}.foo.bar)
                   ^

> TypeError: Cannot read property 'bar' of undefined

Reviewer: You might want to update your node version ;)
As of node 16 (running out of lts) the error description is:

```
TypeError: Cannot read properties of undefined (reading 'bar')
```

    at [eval]-wrapper:6:22
    at evalScript (internal/process/execution.js:80:60)
    at internal/main/eval_string.js:27:3
```
you probably understand why, in the long run, you want to catch these kinds of problems **before** running your code. Preferably even, you want to know this immediately when you type the code into your editor of choice.

### TypeScript to the rescue

Part of the appeal of TypeScript is that it adds this additional layer of static—i.e. before runtime—safety to your JavaScript code.

> "The main benefit of TypeScript is that it can highlight unexpected behavior in your code, lowering the chance of bugs."
> 
> — [TypeScript in 5 Minutes](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/typescript-in-5-minutes.html)

Let's now, for example, directly run the above code examples with TypeScript (using `ts-node`).

```bash
$ ts-node -e 'console.log(3 + [])'
[eval].ts:1:13 - error TS2365: Operator '+' cannot be applied to types 'number' and 'never[]'.

1 console.log(3 + [])
              ~~~~~~
$ ts-node -e 'console.log({}.foo.bar)'
[eval].ts:1:16 - error TS2339: Property 'foo' does not exist on type '{}'.

1 console.log({}.foo.bar)
                 ~~~
```

> As we can see, this type of error can easily be detected before running the code by applying type checking. In the first case, TypeScript tells us that we should reconsider adding a number and an array. In the second case, we are informed that empty objects do not magically come with an arbitrary property called `foo`. Both are very reasonable properties of safe JavaScript code and it's extremely helpful that TypeScript checks them for us before we run the code.

Reviewer: I'd change the wording

```suggestion
As we can see, this type of error can easily be detected before running the code by applying type checking. In the first case, TypeScript tells us that we can not add or concatenate a number and an array. In the second case, we are informed that empty objects do not magically come with an arbitrary property called `foo`. Both are very reasonable properties of safe JavaScript code and it's extremely helpful that TypeScript checks them for us before we run the code.
```

Author: We actually **can** do that in JavaScript tho 😅 it makes very little sense but we can do that.

Unsurprisingly, TypeScript is considered one of the technologies that are considered safe to adopt by the JavaScript developer community, i.e. have both a  high satisfaction and usage level (cf. [State of JS: Satisfaction vs Usage](https://2020.stateofjs.com/en-US/technologies/#scatterplot_overview)).

![State of JS 2020: Satisfaction vs Usage](/assets/2022-06_state-of-js-satisfaction-vs-usage.png)

> TODO note on type inference makes explicit static typing optional

Reviewer: This needs to be resolved.

Author: Yes, I still have to add a line or two here. Thanks!

## Making type annotations part of JavaScript proper

### Motivation

Having established that static typing is generally useful for JavaScript development (and development in general), the question to address is this: why not just develop in TypeScript if we want to add static type checks to our JavaScript development process? 

One big argument in favor of types as comments in JavaScript compared to TypeScript (or similar languages and tools) is that it gives us the choice of type checker we want to use. We could for example opt for [Flow](https://flow.org/) type checker instead of TypeScript's type checker if we preferred that (and if Flow started to support the types as comments syntax).

> Another important argument pro types as comments in JavaScript is that it lets us skip the inevitable JavaScript transpilation step. Compare that to developing in TypeScript, where the usual workflow includes running our code through `tsc` (the TypeScript compiler) before executing it with `node` or in the browser. Dropping the transpilation step may significantly improve the speed of our development loop and moreover may require less set-up (such as the `tsconfig.json` file).

Reviewer: I'd argue that the one time setup for ts is neglectable.
If you have a tsconfig, you're probably using more than just static typing.

Also: What about further configuration and linting? Typescript e.g. allows to enforce typing (e.g. strict , no implicit any, ...). A typing system that is completely optional is not a good type system.

Author: I think you are somewhat missing the point. (Which ofc may be because I'm not clear enough.) There are two arguments here for having type information as (optional) part of the regular JavaScript syntax: 1. it gives you choice of type checker (implicitely, you can pick the rules of the type system that should be applied to your code); 2. the transpilation step can be removed from you development loop.

> A typing system that is completely optional is not a good type system.

I don't agree. Even though the type information may not be checked (i.e. not analysed within the context of a given type system), you still add some information about the intention of your code that is relevant to the human reader.

Reviewer: > you still add some information about the intention of your code that is relevant to the human reader.

But isn't this all about static type checking? For adding information for the human reader jsdoc should already be sufficient.

Author: I don’t think the proposal is about type checking per se. They specifically say that a default type checker for JavaScript isn’t the goal. It‘s more about having type hints as in Python which may or not be type checked via tooling.

> 

### Some examples

The [proposal for types as comments][tc39-types-as-comments] will probably not confront anyone who has worked with either TypeScript or Flow with mind-bending concepts. Rather, the proposed syntax for types (and the associated features of the type system) very closely resembles that of TypeScript and Flow.

A **type annotation** is written in the form `x: T` where `x` is a variable name and `T` is a type name. We may use type annotations in variable declarations or in function parameters.

```typescript
// a variable that stores a string
let x: string; 
// a function that takes two string parameters and returns a boolean value
function equals(s: string, t: string): boolean { /* … */ }
```

Types may be **declared** using the `interface` keyword to introduce a new type or using the `type` keyword to declare aliases.

```typescript
// An object type with a properties coordinate and radius.
interface Circle {
  coordinate: Point;
  radius: number
}
// A shorter alias for boolean
type bool = boolean;
```

Classes also implicitly define types.

```typescript
// Implicitly declares a type Point
class Point {
  x: number;
  y: number
}

> ```

Reviewer: As it's great to look into upcoming features, the whole syntax looks like regular TypeScript code. A reader might want to know what's the difference between TypeScript and the JS proposal without having to read through the proposal itself.

Author: There mostly are none. The whole thing is heavily inspired by TS and Flow. I can add a short paragraph which states that explicitly though. :thumbsup:

JavaScript's primitive data types have corresponding predefined types (such as `number` and `string`).

Curiously, the proposal suggests ignoring anything in between the curly braces of both `interface` as well as `class` declarations. This does not make much sense to me at the moment, but will hopefully be cleared up in the upcoming drafts.

Some more complicated type system features such as

> * * type unions (`type C = A | B`),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* type unions (`type C = A | B`),
```

* generics (`type A<T> = T[]`, `interface Box<T> { content: T; }`)

> * type and non-null assertions (`const point = JSON.parse("{\"x\": 0, \"y\": 0}") as Point` resp. `JSON.parse("{\"x\": 0, \"y\": 0}")!.x`)

Reviewer: Use single quotes for readability?

```suggestion
* type and non-null assertions (`const point = JSON.parse('{"x": 0, "y": 0}') as Point` resp. `JSON.parse('{"x": 0,"y": 0}')!.x`)
```

are also proposed to be supported in order to add some more expressiveness. 

> :information_source: For the full list of features, take a look at [the current draft][tc39-types-as-comments].

Lastly, an extension to the module system syntax is proposed so that types can be imported and exported as well using `import type` respectively `export type`.

## Summary

> The types as comments proposal laid out by the TC39 technical committee for JavaScript suggests adding syntax for optional typing information to JavaScript. With these syntax additions, we may provide type information in JavaScript code to leverage static type checking just as in TypeScript or Flow in order to produce safer code. Having types as comments in JavaScript makes a lot of sense given the popularity of statically typed languages that compile to JavaScript such as TypeScript and Flow. In my opinion, including type information—without a default type checker—is a sensible and cautious approach and should definitely be considered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The types as comments proposal laid out by the TC39 technical committee for JavaScript suggests adding syntax for optional typing information to JavaScript. With these syntax additions, we may provide type information in JavaScript code to leverage static type checking just as in TypeScript or Flow in order to produce safer code. Having types as comments in JavaScript makes a lot of sense given the popularity of statically typed languages that compile to JavaScript such as TypeScript and Flow. In my opinion, including type information — without a default type checker — is a sensible and cautious approach and should definitely be considered.
```

Author: Spaces in between dashes is german grammer. In English there are none. See https://www.grammarly.com/blog/dash/.
